{
\rtf1
\utf
\deff0
{\fonttbl
\f0\froman Times;
\f1\froman Helvetica;
\f2\froman Courier;
}
{\stylesheet
{\s0\f0\fs20\plain\sl-220\sb220\ltr\ql Normal Left to Right;}}
\s0
In 1819 Goudy produced a type which many people regard as one of his greatest achievements. When the Goudy Open was finished he took a proof, filled in the white lines in the letters, and decided the result would make a good text type. He called it Goudy Modern - though he later said the name was not really accurate because the face contained some old-style tendencies.
\par
\s0
Stanley Morison drew attention to the design in his article `Towards an Ideal Type' in the second volume of The Fleuron, which was published in 1924. He commended Goudy Modern as `an admirable letter', and amplified his approval in a review of the type in The Fleuron vii (1930) and again in A Tally of Types (1953). Morison's enthusiasm may have influenced Francis Meynell; he used the face for three of the Nonesuch Press books, including the complete Shakespeare of 1953.
\par
\s0
In `Towards an Ideal Type' Morison named his two requirements for a satisfactory type face: that the essential form should corrrespond with that handed down (that is, that the shapes and proportions of the letters should be familiar), and that the letters should compose agreeably into words. With due respect, I do not think Goudy Modern meets the second of Morison's requrements, and I think he would have perceived that if he had not been so interested in what he imagined was the unusual source of the design. The fact is that a number of the lowercase letters are decidedly out of proportion with the rest. The m is so narrow and the w and z so wide that they seem to belong to different type faces. When they occur in text, especially when they are doubled in words like `common' and `dazzle' or they are adjacent to letters of normal width, the disproportion is obvious and the effect disagreeable. The nose in a and s is close to the belly, which produces a clotted effect. The fitting of the type is strangely irregular; the letters collide or separate in a most erratic way. Taken together, these defects produce a noticeable uneven texture that makes the reading of even a short text an uncomfortable experience. It is allowed that perfect regularity in all respects in a type design is not an absolute requirement; indeed, it may produce a sterilised effect, a lack of vitality. Irregularities in a design are acceptable if they are an ingredient in its charm, do not affect its texture, and are unobtrusive. In Goudy Modern the irregularities of proportion and fitting, however caused, have gone too far.
\par
}
